[SWOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
I think most of us
can agree that we're in shaky
times on the economic front.
To me, this is a magical
time of opportunity.
And our guest today, Charles
Eisenstein, might agree.
Charles is the author of
"Sacred Economy," where
he takes a look at
how our society could
be if we could move past
old expectations and habits,
basically if we could
bust the old kind
of patriarchal
paradigm of economics.
Welcome.
I've wanted to have you
on the show for years
because of that book.
>>CHARLES EISENSTEIN: Wow.
I'm really happy to be here.
>>REGINA: And it's
interesting, because now we're
coming back around.
Here we have this little dip,
this little downturn in 2008,
right?
And went back to our old
consumption patterns.
And here we are again, sitting
at the precipice of what
almost every
economist in the world
seems to believe is a looming
recession that could be worse
than the last one.
So I thought it's time we
really do get creative.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
It could be worse
than a recession.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah, I know.
It could go into the D word.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
Because everybody knows
that the basic problems that
caused the last recession
didn't really get solved.
>>REGINA: Were
swept under the rug
and puffed up more artificially.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: This is-- oh, my god.
Well, first of all, I want to
let everybody get to know you.
This is your first
time on Gaia, right?
>>EISENSTEIN: I think so.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I think so, too.
So let everybody get to
know you a little bit,
because I was reading a recent
article you wrote, and I just--
I loved it because you're
so candid and revealing
about yourself, your inner
motivations, that you
were kind of embarrassed
to share, and all of that.
And so let's just start this
part of our conversation,
"get to know Charles" part
of the conversation when
we go into the book
that you wrote,
called "The Ascent of Humanity."
I guess it was a nice
intellectual heady thing
that you thought was going to
bring some real understanding
and enlightenment
to the world, right?
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah, I
thought, just like in school,
if you turn in the "A" paper,
then good things happen.
So I kind of thought that if I
wrote this 600-page book that
had all the right answers in
it, then the world would change
and I would become
rich and famous.
That was the plan.
>>REGINA: Well, yeah,
that was the plan.
And so five months in, you had
sold five copies that month?
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
The first month,
I sold 100 copies
when all my friends bought it.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: I know that one.
>>EISENSTEIN: Then the
next month it was like 10,
and the next month it was five.
>>REGINA: So it wasn't
setting the world on fire, OK,
but what were you starting to--
what were you grappling
with inside yourself?
>>EISENSTEIN: As far
as the book goes?
>>REGINA: Mhm.
>>EISENSTEIN: The motivation--
>>REGINA: And your
reaction to the fact
that people just weren't
picking up on it.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah,
I was dismayed.
And all those ambitions
kind of fell apart.
And I was faced with my
actual deeper motivations
for wanting to devote
so many years of my life
to write this book, which
was driven by a question I'd
had for decades--
what is the origin of the
wrongness in the world?
Why, when I look at any
institution, any system
of our culture, it's corrupt.
Why is that?
I had to know.
And so I-- and I thought many
other people must be having
the same question, maybe not so
clearly articulated, but this--
just looking around, people
are not wholeheartedly
participating in normal.
>>REGINA: That's true.
>>EISENSTEIN: So
I thought-- yeah,
I thought that this book
would really strike a chord.
And when it didn't, I got
to examine my other motives,
such as--
>>REGINA: Because you were out
to help humanity go deeper.
>>EISENSTEIN: Well, that's
what I was telling myself.
>>REGINA: That's right.
That was the cover story.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
And that motive was
certainly there along
with the motive of being a
success in my father's eyes,
becoming wealthy, becoming
a respected thought leader.
Like I had all of
these ego motives, too.
And when those didn't work
out, I was faced with, OK,
why am I really doing this?
And will I continue this
work even if I don't attain
any of these other prizes?
>>REGINA: And that's a big
one for a lot of people.
And there's always
a point at which
someone gets to see who
they are in that process.
And so you had a
unique experience
in that you had a vision.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
Basically I was asked by a--
I don't know if you could
call it a spiritual entity,
an angel-- some being
that basically said--
>>REGINA: And you
didn't normally
see these beings, right?
>>EISENSTEIN: No.
And I'm not going to claim that
it was an actual visitation.
>>REGINA: Right.
But some presence--
>>EISENSTEIN: But something--
>>REGINA: --came
and spoke with you.
>>EISENSTEIN: --was asking me
very clearly, what do you want?
What do you choose?
And what are you willing
to sacrifice in order
to help create a
more beautiful world?
Are you willing to sacrifice
wealth, fame, recognition?
Would you be
willing-- if this was
what it took to
change the world,
would you be willing to
get no credit at all?
Have somebody else
get the credit
and you die in obscurity,
and then someone else is
celebrated for the thoughts
that you've developed?
Are you willing
to pay that price?
>>REGINA: That's a
very big question
to confront your ego with.
Truly.
Because you really had
to dig inside yourself.
And it's interesting,
because you ultimately--
tell the rest of the
conversation, what
they said to you.
>>EISENSTEIN: Well--
>>REGINA: We can
give you this, but.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah, well, it was
more of a hypothetical, like,
are you willing to
make this payment?
And I said, yes, I am.
And did things change
overnight after that?
Nope.
But over time, it--
at least the story
that I'm telling myself
is that because I was willing
to make that payment, to let
go of those other goals,
the ground was then
clear for the work
to actually fulfill
its purpose and potential.
And I can't say that I'm famous
or anything, but at least I'm--
>>REGINA: You're
well-respected in your area.
>>EISENSTEIN: I'm
well-respected.
I'm able to do my work.
I'm getting enough support
from the world to do it.
But I think that this-- like,
I don't want to make this
into this heroic
thing that I did,
because I think everybody is
faced with choices like this,
clarifying choices.
The universe is
generous in this way,
that if you're
serving two masters,
you'll reach a
choice point where
you get to decide which one
you're actually serving.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>EISENSTEIN: And you get
to know yourself better.
>>REGINA: And you
make your choice.
And then you have
to sleep with that.
What you said is so true.
I mean, you look around at
all the people in our lives,
once you hit 30, 40, 50,
sometimes it takes till 60,
ultimately you see
that somewhere you
made that decision.
And that can be soothing and
create peace in one's life,
or it can kind of
be devastating,
making you feel like you have
to somehow play catch-up, right?
So when you realized you were
willing to make the sacrifice,
how did you start
putting yourself
in the world in a way to be
of service at that point?
>>EISENSTEIN: Well,
at that point,
being almost completely
unknown, I basically
said yes to every offer.
And in between, I was
working at a construction job
to feed my children.
And eventually, I just--
you know, things
eventually picked up.
There was one breakthrough
after another after another.
And it felt like they were
lucky breaks in a way.
And that if I had been
on a different timeline,
I could be completely unknown
and obscure to this day.
I mean, sometimes I
read amazing books
by people who are
totally unknown.
And then, like, I read
bestsellers, and I'm like,
you know--
>>REGINA: How'd this happen?
>>EISENSTEIN: --this
isn't as good.
>>REGINA: Right.
Exactly.
It's not about merit.
A lot of it has
to do with timing.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
And people who are
successful sometimes
like to attribute their
success to their merit.
But I don't know.
I'm much more of a
believer in fate, I guess.
>>REGINA: Mhm.
Interesting.
And so you started coming
to the position that
doing these great big works,
like your would-have-been
best-selling book, right?
And such really don't
carry any more weight
than single acts of generosity,
kindness, compassion.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
OK, so this is a different
aspect of the ambition
to write a bestseller,
or write something
that sells hundreds of
thousands or millions of copies.
It's the idea that
that will have a bigger
impact on the world than if I
only reach 1,000 people or 500
people or one person.
>>REGINA: Or help a little
old lady across the street.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
But in some
spiritual traditions,
I'm thinking especially of
Zen, the greatest teachers
are often the ones who
had only one disciple,
whereas the ones that
had hundreds or thousands
are considered maybe not
quite at that top tier.
And because the understanding
is that the world does not
work as we think it does.
Our meaning or the dominant
culture's idea of causality
is basically
Newtonian, that says
that something changes when
you exert a force on a mass.
Therefore the more
force that you
have at your disposal,
the more powerful you are.
So if you have a lot of money,
a lot of military force,
a big platform, a
loud voice, you're
going to influence
a lot more people
and change the world
in a bigger way
than if you're operating
on a very small level, just
within a family, just
working with one person,
taking care of one little piece
of land, one little garden, one
child.
That's not very important.
So the result is
everybody's competing
with each other to be
important, competing with each
other for market share, for
audience, for mailing list,
for book sales, and so on.
And some of it is
personal ambition.
I want to be great.
But a lot of it is also
this indoctrination
into a theory of change that
I think is actually obsolete.
When we consider morphic
resonance, which--
>>REGINA: Yes.
Once you enter
the quantum field,
then that one act
of generosity takes
on a completely
different meaning
and level of importance.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
>>REGINA: And explain that.
Talk about it.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah, and on
a 500-year timescale, who
knows what the most
important thing that you
did in your entire life is?
So morphic resonance,
Rupert Sheldrake's theory,
basically says that any change
that happens in one place
creates a field of change so
that the same change begins
happening elsewhere.
Any act of generosity,
any act of kindness
creates a field of generosity
or kindness or compassion.
Even if nobody
finds out about it
because your video of your
generous act went viral.
In fact, it's kind
of the opposite.
If you make a big
show of it, then
what you're putting
out into the world
is a competing for
attention rather than
a pure act of generosity.
So there's a kind of faith here
that trusts a causal matrix
that we're not trained to see.
Now, I'm not saying, like, you
shouldn't do anything political
or shouldn't do
anything practical.
But it's that we
can trust that we're
going to be put in the
right place and respond.
Whether it's a big
act or a small act,
we can trust where that
act is coming from.
>>REGINA: That was a big
leap of faith for you.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
I mean, I still--
I can't say that I'm totally
free of that way of thinking.
You know, if I'm invited to
be on a podcast or something,
and it has an
audience of a million,
and another one has an
audience of 30, you know--
>>REGINA: It's like, hmm--
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: --let's see if I
have a conflict of interest,
which one am I going to do?
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>EISENSTEIN: So, yeah,
I still am enculturated
into that way of
thinking, but also there
are the moments that there's
no way that this is ever
going to go viral.
It's just me and
one person, and it
might be a whole afternoon
in intimate conversation.
Or time with my dear
mother, who is not
likely to be the
vehicle of my success.
But something in
me knows that this
is the most important thing
I could be doing right now.
>>REGINA: That's true value.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And we don't-- true value isn't
really part of our economic
structure, for one.
>>EISENSTEIN: Well, yeah, it's
totally invisible in economics.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
You're not generating
goods and services
by doing that kind of thing.
>>REGINA: No.
But it's an intrinsic
part of the balance
to the whole
system, which we are
going to work our way toward.
But let's talk about this--
should I take the
million versus 30?
OK, so you ended up on "Oprah."
>>EISENSTEIN: Yes.
>>REGINA: And you wrote a--
tell us what inspired
Oprah to pick you up
and put you on her show.
>>EISENSTEIN: It was an article
I wrote after the election.
>>REGINA: Of Trump.
>>EISENSTEIN: Of Trump, yeah.
Basically-- see if I
remember what I said.
>>REGINA: I actually had
that paper somewhere.
I printed it off.
You said so many
wonderful things in it.
And it really was about kind
of the future trajectory
we could expect once
Trump came into office,
but it was on a meta scale.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah, go ahead.
>>EISENSTEIN: I
think a lot of it
was about political
polarization.
>>REGINA: Yes, it was.
>>EISENSTEIN: And
how when I read
liberal sites and
conservative sites,
underneath the surface
of the different opinions
was something in
common, which was
the diagnosis of the problem
is those horrible people
on the other side.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: And if we could
only overcome them and arouse
as much indignation and outrage
to rally the troops, to win
this war against evil, then the
world will be a better place.
That actually is the
template of dehumanization
that is responsible for so many
of the problems in our world.
To dehumanize somebody is a
necessary step to exploit them.
Racism is a form
of dehumanization.
Sexism is a form
Xenophobia, all
of these isms are
a way of making a human
less than they really are.
Same thing with calling them
deplorable, or calling them--
like, you're reducing them.
Or just thinking that
they're ignorant and stupid,
and what's wrong with them.
And that way of thinking
also applies to nature.
It's not-- you wouldn't
say dehumanization,
but maybe desacralization-- to
reduce the unique sacred living
beings of nature into
just board feet of lumber,
sources of commodities,
resources--
>>REGINA: Right.
Instead of living families
of forests, you know?
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
And so the revolution
that we are in right now,
if I can use such
a charged term--
>>REGINA: I think it's true.
>>EISENSTEIN: It's a
revolution in our perception
so that we come to see the
world as alive, as a companion,
as a sacred being.
To see the soil as a living
being that is sacred.
To see the forests that way.
To see all people that way.
And imagine how different
our systems would be--
our economic systems, our
technological systems--
if we were in full relationship
to the sacredness of the world.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Even our political systems.
And while we're not talking
about politics directly,
I did an experiment
recently on my own site,
which is under my name.
And I invited a woman on who
has an opposing-- if I were--
I would certainly
be cast in the lot
of probably more liberal, more
progressive, but maybe a little
anarchistic as
well, and so forth.
And, you know, we see debates
between these all the time.
And I invited her on
to say, you know what?
You and I as women want
the same thing in the end.
We want to have the same kind
of communities, cultures,
relationships with our family.
You're seeing this as a path,
and I'm seeing this as a path.
So let's talk and find
out where the bridge is.
And a lot of people
have been watching these
because of what you
just said-- there's
something that's
beginning to rise
and it's helping understand.
You can't just keep pointing
fingers at the other person.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
Yeah, I'm much more
interested in what
are the secret agreements
that unite opposite sides.
>>REGINA: Me too.
>>EISENSTEIN: And what
are we actually striving
for that might get
projected onto Trump
or projected onto somebody.
This idea-- like, as you
were describing that woman,
I thought, yeah, it's the
intuition that what we need
is something from outside
of normal to come in.
And that desire
could get projected
onto any charismatic figure.
>>REGINA: It can.
I mean, I said to
her at the beginning,
I'm going to say this
straight up front.
I think that a
person like Trump,
which is happening
all over the world,
had to enter the scene
in order to even create
this kind of dialogue, this
kind of action-reaction.
Right?
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah, it
certainly-- and he certainly
brought a lot of things to the
surface that would otherwise
remain hidden.
>>REGINA: Right.
And so this article--
it was very beautifully
written, by the way.
>>EISENSTEIN: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And so your attempt was
to show us that enemies--
the other guy with the
other point of view, A,
we've got to stop
this enemy story.
Right?
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah, because
it's based-- it's actually
a false diagnosis.
When you diagnose the problem
as being fundamentally caused
by bad people, that's actually
a really infantile way
of looking at the world.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: It's like
the superhero movie.
The problem is
caused by the Joker.
And the solution is,
you kill the Joker
and the problem's gone.
I mean, that's almost all
Hollywood action movies.
>>REGINA: It is infantile.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
You're supposed to grow
out of that at about age 6.
Like my son, he's still
really into Darth Vader.
Really into the good guys
and the bad guys, you know.
But you're not supposed
to build a whole culture,
a whole political system,
a whole medical system,
a whole agricultural system--
>>REGINA: Or educational system.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah, on
identifying the bad guy
and destroying the bad guy.
Because actually the world is
a lot more complex than that.
And a lot of what we
see as the bad guy
is actually a symptom
of deeper conditions.
And by focusing on
the bad guy, you
neglect the deeper conditions.
By focusing on the outbreak
of weeds in your field,
you're not paying
attention and you kill them
with Roundup or something.
You're not paying attention to,
what are the soil conditions?
What happened to
the soil ecology?
What about the biodiversity
that would keep
pest species under control?
Like, none of that enters
into the conversation
when you are so focused
on finding the nail
that you can pound
with your hammer.
>>REGINA: Right.
Exactly.
And that's where
we are, as you say,
systemically and with each other
on a social level right now--
a societal level, right?
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So we've
got some work to do.
We have a lot-- there's
a lot of coming together
in new ways to chat and
such that has to happen.
So you shared this with Oprah.
But let's go back to
your own ambitions
and the notion Oprah has
invited you on, you know.
You've tried working
through the ego stuff.
How did that work with you?
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah, I
mean, by that point,
I had had enough kind of
false promises that I'm like,
oh, finally I've
made the breakthrough
and everything is
going to explode now.
So by that point, I had had
that happen enough times
that I wasn't really loading
too much expectation onto it.
And I think her influence
isn't what it was in the '90s.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: So-- and
it definitely gave me
some more visibility,
but it wasn't
like book sales exploding
through the roof or anything.
>>REGINA: Right.
Like the old days.
>>EISENSTEIN: But I thought
it was also significant
because a lot of my work
has been very marginal.
It hasn't really gotten
into universities.
I'm very much a countercultural
intellectual, you could say.
And that was a brush with
the mainstream that I'm like,
OK, I haven't changed.
It's not that I've
sold out and become
more conventional
in my opinions,
so why am I getting this
engagement with the mainstream?
And maybe Oprah's not, like,
mainstream-mainstream, but--
>>REGINA: Still
pretty mainstream.
>>EISENSTEIN: --pretty
mainstream, yeah.
I'm like, maybe that means
that the mainstream is shifting
and that the ideas
that I represent
are no longer so
alternative, so unthinkable,
so outside of reality.
Because as the mainstream
reality frays around the edges
and begins to dissolve,
and economic collapse
is maybe part of this--
ecological collapse,
the collapse of all of
our systems, the growing
ineffectiveness of the medical
system, et cetera, et cetera.
As this dissolving progresses,
the people in the mainstream
are really looking
to the outside.
>>REGINA: That was what one
of your articles talked about,
is what happens on
the margins, right?
Explain that to everyone,
because I thought
it was just so perfectly put.
>>EISENSTEIN: Well, I'm not
quite sure what you mean,
but I can say that--
>>REGINA: The things that were
on the margins start coming--
>>EISENSTEIN: They
rush into the center--
>>REGINA: --to center,
when these were really
marginal ideas once upon a time.
Once this is vacated with any
sense of stability, normalcy,
or whatnot.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
When the center
begins to collapse,
the ensuing vacuum sucks in
the things that have been--
>>REGINA: The marginal
stuff starts--
yes.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
Like, you can even see
this happening already
with, like, acupuncture.
I mean, that used to be kooky,
like, left-wing nonsense,
you know?
>>REGINA: Now your
HMO covers it.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
Same thing with
medicine and in food.
I think these are
where it really starts.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: Farmers markets
and organic agriculture.
>>REGINA: Organic
movement, yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: So
I think that we're
going to see this
progressing as the infirmity
of a lot of our
established systems
becomes more and more evident.
>>REGINA: I agree with that.
So now let's talk about
what you consider to be true
value and some of
your heroes in life.
And one of them was a guy named
Roy Brubaker, as I recall,
right?
Was he a farmer?
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
So-- and he's just
one of these--
he's just an example of one
of the people who exemplify--
and he wasn't a close
friend or anything.
He's kind of a-- their family's
kind of friends with my family.
My brother's a farmer,
you know, and they're
in the same circles.
And he's since passed away.
But he's just one
of those people
that maybe you've
come across sometimes,
too, who are just so
generous that it's
almost painful to see them.
And they're almost
like an emissary
from a different world.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: So he would--
he had this really successful
thriving organic farm,
and he had all these interns.
And you know, farmers
are very, very busy.
And it's not like he was
getting rich, you know.
I mean, he's busy and
trying to make ends meet.
But anytime-- like
there's all these stories.
Anytime anybody would
call him, hey, I've
got a problem with my
tractor, and he would
try to tell them how to fix it.
And if he couldn't, he
would leave the farm,
go to their farm and
spend his whole afternoon
fixing their tractor.
No questions asked.
He would just do
that automatically.
And when his intern
left the farm
to set up his own
farm and his own--
>>REGINA: That's becoming--
in our current system would
be considered a competitor.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
Yeah.
And his own
subscription service,
you know, vegetable, like--
>>REGINA: Mhm.
Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: Like, Roy not
only gave him his blessing,
but actually
publicized this guy who
is a direct competitor
with himself.
And why would somebody do that?
I really think
seriously about that.
Why would somebody do that?
Only if he's understanding
the world in a different way,
understanding that more
for you is not less for me.
More for you is more for
me, because we're not
really separate.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: That's how
it is in a gift culture.
>>REGINA: Right.
And the whole notion of nature
collaborating versus competing
for its survival.
We have a very collaborative
system that we work--
that we live on and that we're
interacting with all the time.
But we've somehow
managed to corrupt it
into this really ridiculous
system of competition, which
has led us to an economy
that is so unhealthy.
I mean, if you--
as I call it, kind of elites and
wingnuts really benefit from it
and everybody else is left
with their little begging
bowls out, trying to get by.
This is wrong.
>>EISENSTEIN: Well,
two things to that.
One is that not even the
elites and wingnuts actually
benefit from it.
>>REGINA: No, not really.
The perception is that they do.
And that's the tool they want to
use for winning in their game.
>>EISENSTEIN: OK, so it
does seem like the elites
are the big winners.
And in the game as they
have constituted it,
they are the winners.
But the question is, what
have they actually won?
So let me return to
competition a little bit
and then go back to that.
Because it's not
that competition
is nonexistent in nature.
There is competition in nature.
But it's never the case that
if only one species would
disappear, then all
of its competitors
would be better off.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
It's a holistic
kind of competition.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
And so the well-being and
in nature and in ecology,
the well-being of the whole
depends on the well-being
of each of the parts.
If the wolves are sick
or the wolves disappear,
that doesn't mean that the
deer are finally better off.
In fact, what it means is that
the deer population explodes.
They strip the understory
and they starve.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: So the motto
"more for you is more for me,
your well-being
is my well-being,"
that is true in nature and it's
true in a gift economy, which
was every economy
until recently.
Because in a gift
economy, you don't hoard.
If you have more than
you need, you give it
to those who are in need.
Not only because
you're altruistic,
not only because you
love these people,
but also because you know that
if you're very generous, then
when you're in need, people
will take care of you, too.
So generosity is like
your bank account.
>>REGINA: And
right now, you have
to go through this
enormous leap of faith
to break from the old paradigm
until you have some evidence
that this is true.
That's the scary
part for people,
and that's where
it usually stops.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
Because our economic system
makes it true that more for you
is less for me.
Because you get
the job, I don't.
You repay your loan, and
there's not enough money
for me to repay my loan.
Ultimately it's grounded in
the debt-based money-creation
system.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: So anyway,
to go back to the elites,
they might have a lot of money,
they might have their yacht,
they might have
their private jet,
but if you look at their
level of happiness--
and this could be measured,
but also just intuitively--
is this a happy person compared
to a villager in Gambia
or Costa Rica?
>>REGINA: I remember people in
Belize living in tree houses,
coming out with large
families, but freshly pressed
and washed, the white
dresses and things,
but giving you their
seat on the bus and such.
Just smiling.
You know, the generosity
of a culture that was so
poor at the time I was there.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
And they were not miserable
people because of that.
>>REGINA: No.
No.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
Probably more joyful than most
people that you ever meet here.
>>REGINA: Oh, absolutely.
I would agree with that.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah, like
dancing spontaneously.
Dancing in the streets.
So you visit a place like
that, and you're aware
then of the poverty that
we've cast ourselves into,
that material possessions
and status objects are
a kind of compensation for--
they're false wealth in
place of true wealth.
True wealth is to feel that
you're at home in the world,
that you belong.
It's a kind of
security that doesn't
depend on how much you control.
And very few people
have that when
your security depends on money
and a financial crisis could
wipe it all out.
And then what do you have?
If you live in a
traditional village,
no matter what
happens, other people
are going to take care of you.
>>REGINA: Someone's
still growing a crop.
There's someone that
can still fix the fence.
There's still a baker.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
And you've seen that
your whole life.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
And it's more than that.
Also you know who you
are, because you're
enmeshed in a web of
stories and relationships
rather than interacting
with distant strangers
to meet all of your needs.
>>REGINA: That's
true, and I just
want to bring-- this is from
a film about J. Paul Getty
and the kidnapping
of his grandson.
And there was just this
pathetic moment when--
I've forgotten who was
inquiring at the time,
whether it was the person that
was negotiating the hostage
agreement--
who actually I knew in
real life, that person--
is asking him, how
much is enough?
Because he would not let go of
the money to get his grandson.
And here he had just
essentially palaces full
of ancient artifacts and
rugs, and stingily washing
his little underwear out
by hand and hanging it
in his little palatial room,
the one room that he lived in.
It's like, what is up with
that kind of psychology?
A lonely person.
And the answer was, there
is no such thing as enough.
There's never enough.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
Never enough.
>>REGINA: That has to be one
of the saddest statements I
think I've ever heard.
>>EISENSTEIN: It's the
same as any addiction.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: The addiction
doesn't meet the real need,
therefore no amount is enough.
And when it's in economic
terms, we call it greed.
And then we activate the
same bad guy mentality.
The problem is those
greedy executives,
those greedy bankers,
those greedy investors.
If only we could conquer greedy
people and conquer greed,
then everything would be fine.
But their greed is a symptom
of a profound dispossession.
A dispossession of
community, of relationship,
of belonging in the world.
And as long as that remains, if
we destroy the greedy people,
there'll be an endless
supply of new greedy people.
>>REGINA: Yes,
because our system
is based on that ourselves.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
So that's why I'm more
interested in uncovering
and healing the conditions
that give rise to the things
that we judge and condemn.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And that's why I'm
attracted to your work,
is because you state things
so beautifully and so clearly.
So let's talk about what
a gift economy looks like.
How do you reinstitute
a gift economy
in the middle of this
really messed up system?
And let's talk
about what happens
and what the potential is
in this potential or likely
recession that could lead
to a depression, a really
kind of world-changing
depression
where the ships
stop shipping stuff.
>>EISENSTEIN: So I'll
just say right out,
I don't know how to
transition to a gift
economy on a mass scale.
It's never happened before.
Gift economies have always
been on a small scale, where--
>>REGINA: Let's just keep
it to the small scale,
because that we
can manage anyway.
Then we can choose to be in
a place where we can do this.
>>EISENSTEIN: Well,
I mean, certainly we
can reclaim some of our
lives from the system
of mass production and the
global division of labor,
but we can't reclaim
all of our lives
from that, unless you want
to go live in an ecovillage
somewhere and be
self-sufficient and so forth.
>>REGINA: Right.
You're going to buy
a toothbrush that's
probably made somewhere else.
>>EISENSTEIN:
Probably, or a cell
phone that requires a global
coordination of labor.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
That's not going away.
>>EISENSTEIN: There are
people who don't do that,
but that's not a
realistic prescription,
for 8 billion people to all
go back to that right now.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
So for me, the more
interesting question is,
how do we bring some of
the principles and spirit
of gift economy to the mass
economy, the money economy?
And in "Sacred Economics" I
go into some of the proposals.
One of them is to change
the way that money
is created and distributed away
from interest-bearing debt.
To explain that
right now, I'd have
to kind of outline the
whole money creation system
and so forth.
So I will say is, basically
the key insight is that money
is actually just a story.
Money is just an agreement
among human beings
that assigns value to symbols.
And that story can be changed.
The story that we have
now gives the power
to create money to
certain entities
under certain conditions.
They're called banks.
OK, so we have a system where
money is lent into existence
as interest-bearing debt,
meaning that there is always
more debt than there is money.
Meaning that we're always--
>>REGINA: Scarcity.
>>EISENSTEIN: Scarcity,
competition, anxiety,
and endless growth.
>>REGINA: It's so sick.
>>EISENSTEIN: And it's
built into the system.
And it's a set of agreements.
And agreements can be changed.
We talk about $20 trillion
of debt for the United States
government.
Well, what is that actually?
That's only bits in computers.
And that could change with a
change in our social agreements
and political agreements.
Nothing is written in stone.
So as humanity and
as civilization,
as our society transitions
into a different story that's
not about a separate self
in a world of other seeking
to outcompete all
the rest of life
to come to a triumphant
domination of the planet,
but instead a story
of interconnection,
interdependency, ecology,
interbeingness, compassion,
and empathy, then
the story of money,
which fit perfectly into that
old story, no longer fits.
It no longer resonates with
the emerging consciousness
on Earth.
So the question, then, that
I investigate in the book
is, what system of money would
resonate with the emerging
values of cooperation,
symbiosis, ecology, sharing,
generosity?
What would money look like
that didn't reward hoarding?
If you kept it, its value
declines rather than increases
because of interest.
What would it look like if you
weren't forced to make money
in order to make
a living, if you
had a universal basic income?
So I go into really
nuts-and-bolts
economic questions like that.
>>REGINA: And I want to
get into some of them
so people can start
contemplating.
Because here we're
looking at a time
where we have this disruption
in our current economic picture
coming up most likely.
And our parents,
depending on how old
you are, or grandparents went
through this in the Depression.
And they had to learn
to collaborate again
because there was nothing.
There was no food.
There was no money.
People did-- they were
living in extended family.
And at that time, we
were almost living
in more of a gift economy,
gifting economy out
of necessity.
The thing is, then
that gave birth
to the next generation,
which was told, you save.
And by the time you
were in second grade,
you had a little
passbook that you
put your quarters in that went
in once a week to the bank,
you know.
So you started your savings
account when you were,
what, seven or eight years old.
And the holy grail was to
have a "savings account."
>>EISENSTEIN: And
financial independence.
>>REGINA: And financial
independence--
>>EISENSTEIN: I mean,
that's what it becomes.
>>REGINA: --so you don't have to
live with your extended family
and your old grandpa anymore.
>>EISENSTEIN:
Financial independence
means you don't need anybody.
>>REGINA: You need anybody.
>>EISENSTEIN: I don't
need anybody's gifts.
I can take care of it myself.
>>REGINA: And that's
the boomer generation,
going into the Xer generation.
Now we have something new.
People aren't
making enough money.
There isn't enough money to
buy a house in most places
in this country
anymore on a normal job
or a one-income family.
So now, it seems,
by necessity we're
going to have to go back into
some kind of other economy,
some kind of, you call
it gifting economy.
What does that look like now
for the millennials and younger?
>>EISENSTEIN: Well,
gifting economy really just
means community.
It means that you take care of
each other without being paid.
It means you help your
neighbor fix their roof.
It means you share the
vegetables from your garden.
It means you help watch
each other's kids.
All that kind of stuff.
That's community.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>EISENSTEIN: And when it
gets replaced by contractors,
by insurance to help you fix
your house, by paid child care,
then the economy grows, but
you no longer have community.
The difference between
now and the '30s--
>>REGINA: And you have a lot
more stress on the individual.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
And everything depends on money.
Whereas if you have a really
well-connected community,
you don't--
if you lose your income,
you don't lose everything
because you still
have people around.
And you've probably been
helping them for years,
for decades, so they'll
take care of you, too.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: The difference
between today and the '30s
is that we don't have those
strongly-knit communities
anymore.
Most people don't even know
their neighbors very well.
They don't have
anybody they can call
an emergency who lives nearby.
So I think you're right that
an economic breakdown could
encourage people to
re-forge those ties.
But many of the habits of
community have languished.
But I think it's still
fundamental to human nature.
We see it when there's
a natural disaster.
>>REGINA: Yes, exactly.
It automatically
rises to the surface.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
And so that's one of the gifts
that an economic breakdown
could bring us.
But that's not to excuse the
necessity for some systems
change, which I
think would really
start with debt relief
or debt cancellation.
>>REGINA: Yeah, let's talk about
some of the basic principles
so we can kind of
start thinking about it
and lobbying toward that.
>>EISENSTEIN: I mean, this would
require a complicated lecture,
but I can simplify
one thing which will
resonate with your intuition.
Which is that in 2008,
there was a bailout, right?
Who got bailed out?
>>REGINA: The banks.
>>EISENSTEIN: The banks--
>>REGINA: Not the students
with the debt load.
>>EISENSTEIN: That's right.
The insurance companies,
they got bailed out.
The investors got bailed out.
They were fined.
>>REGINA: And then we nailed
the students with debts.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yep.
The students didn't
get bailed out.
Homeowners didn't
People with credit card
debt didn't get bailed out.
The next bailout shouldn't
be a creditors' bailout.
It should be a
debtors' bailout--
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>EISENSTEIN: --where basically
the Federal Reserve buys up all
of these troubled debts and
either cancels them completely
in a debt jubilee, which has
historical precedent going back
to biblical times--
>>REGINA: Oh, let's talk
about a couple of debt
jubilees even in recent times.
I want to hear about this.
>>EISENSTEIN:
Well, let me just--
>>REGINA: Yeah,
finish your statement,
then give us a couple examples.
>>EISENSTEIN: Or it could reduce
the interest rates to zero,
or even negative.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: Anything is
possible because, again, debt
is an agreement.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: It's a social
and political agreement.
>>REGINA: I don't think the
people would stand for it
if once again those same
entities got a second bailout
and everyone else is left
holding the bag, only worse--
worse off than before.
>>EISENSTEIN: I would like
people not to stand for it.
>>REGINA: I hope they don't.
>>EISENSTEIN: And
to help them not
stand for it, we can say
that there is an alternative.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: One
reason people stand
for it is that they don't know
that there's any other way
to do it.
But when we understand
that you're not
supposed to be in hopeless
debt your whole life.
And if you are, it's not
because you're a bad person.
It's because the system is
stacked to require that.
In the 1960s, public education
was higher education.
Universities were nearly free.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: You could
work a part-time job
and pay for your education.
>>REGINA: Well, now Bernie
Sanders, if he brings it up,
is called a communist,
because people
don't know what socialism,
democratic socialism
even means.
And so it's taking on
this whole other flavor.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
But it used to be like that,
like under Eisenhower--
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
>>EISENSTEIN: --in the '50s.
Eisenhower wasn't a communist.
>>REGINA: No.
[LAUGHS] Exactly.
It is funny how the story
keeps being kind of bastardized
in the mainstream media.
But yes, that's true.
That was available.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
And so that's just to say that
the debt that is oppressing
everybody is illegitimate.
It's not legitimate
debt if you're forced
to go into debt just to live.
>>REGINA: That is so true.
>>EISENSTEIN: That
is called feudalism.
That is called debt peonage.
A debt peon is somebody
who has to serve
his debts his entire life.
He's controlled by his
masters through debt.
And when people understand
that that is illegitimate,
then the political will will
arise to change the system.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
So before we go on to another
kind of functional shift
in reality we could choose,
let's talk about debt jubilee.
Because I think when people hear
that, it's like, debt jubilee?
What a wonderful concept.
The first thing you
sense is freedom in that.
So are there examples-- you said
there are examples historically
where this has occurred.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
You know, it's
mentioned in the Bible.
There was a big debt
jubilee in ancient Athens,
because what was
happening is more and more
citizens were going into
debt, losing their land,
losing their families,
losing themselves.
They would become slaves if
they couldn't pay their debt.
And it was harming--
it was causing social unrest and
reducing the base of citizens
to fewer and fewer who
were the only ones allowed
to serve in the army.
You had to be a citizen
to serve in the army,
so it was weakening the state.
And there was all this
political pressure.
So Solon, the
great leader Solon,
whose name is synonymous
with wisdom today,
he took power and
instituted a debt jubilee.
He canceled the debts,
restored the lands,
and gave rise to
classical Athens
as one of the golden
ages of human history.
So that's--
>>REGINA: That's such
a beautiful thought.
I mean, and everyone can
feel the relief and freedom
and kind of veracity
in the value of that.
And so-- I mean, I love it.
Is there an actual--
I mean, we know
people, there are
people kind of fighting on
this student debt thing.
But is there a debt
jubilee movement itself?
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, you see it
mentioned sometimes.
If you do an internet
search on it,
I'm sure you'll find
a lot of information.
It is a thing now.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it is a thing.
OK.
So people can plug in and put
some energy there if they wish.
>>EISENSTEIN: And I think it
also resonates with emerging
spiritual values
and understandings,
such as that you don't--
the value of forgiveness.
A debt is a kind of a--
it's analogous to a
resentment that you
hold to another person.
And ultimately you
realize you don't
want to hold them forever
in a kind of servitude
to your resentment.
You want to let go of it.
So forgiveness is also
a kind of a generosity.
>>REGINA: It is.
It's a gift.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
So I think that this is--
like, we're talking
about economics here,
but our economic system
will not significantly
change except as part
of a larger change,
as part of a social,
psychological, spiritual
change.
We are-- because
the money system,
as I mentioned
before, it's totally
aligned with the values
of competition and growth
and domination.
As those values change,
the economic system
can change with it.
And as the economic
system changes,
it nourishes different values.
Like, if you live in a gift
economy and every single day
you see that the most generous
person is the most honored,
then you don't need
to hold onto things.
And teachings like
the Golden Rule,
as you do unto others so--
do unto others as you would
have them do unto you--
>>REGINA: As you would
have them do unto you.
Yep.
>>EISENSTEIN: --gets flipped
into, as you do unto others,
so they do unto you.
As you do unto others,
so you are actually
doing unto yourself.
That's obvious in
a gift economy,
because you give to
somebody and they have more,
so they give to somebody
else, and they are doing well,
so they give to somebody else.
And it circles back to you.
Karma is obvious
in a gift economy.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And I think, for me-- one area
I did some stories on a while
back, over a decade ago--
I really like and appreciate
is the notion of time banking,
or you can call
it something else.
I find that really
very doable place
to start, especially in
smaller local economies
or even within
neighborhoods or some group
structure of some kind.
You can start time
banking-- if you
go to church-- within a church,
and the membership of a church,
or a small town.
Let's talk about the value.
Is that is that part of
what you see as something--
>>EISENSTEIN: I think so.
>>REGINA: --that
could come forward?
>>EISENSTEIN: You know, yeah,
I mean, so time banking,
basically everybody's time
is equal and so if you--
>>REGINA: An hour is
an hour, if it's--
>>EISENSTEIN: An hour's an hour.
>>REGINA: --an apple
pie or a legal contract.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
Right.
And I think that it
can help to rebuild
some of these reciprocal
relationships in community.
There's also the
risk that it ends up
quantifying things that in
a really healthy community
aren't quantified.
>>REGINA: Tell us
what you mean by that.
>>EISENSTEIN: So
in time banking,
if you babysit the
neighbors' kids,
say, then you get--
you know, for two hours
you get two time dollars,
or whatever you call them.
And if you do a
lot of that, you're
going to get lots and
lots of time dollars.
And then you can spend
them on lawn care.
Somebody will mow your lawn,
or something like that.
But quantifying things,
something's always left out.
>>REGINA: Well,
talk about how that
leads to quantifying things.
I mean, you might say,
it's easy for maybe a woman
or a grandmother to watch
a child for six hours,
not so easy to drop six
hours of legal documents.
>>EISENSTEIN: Or
maybe you understand.
So if you're in a
community and you
are familiar with
each other's lives
and you're talking
about each other,
then you might know that
so-and-so's babysitting
contribution was actually like
a huge sacrifice for them.
They really went
out of their way.
They had to-- like, you know
who's actually generous.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: And
when you try to--
it's a qualitative thing.
It's based on all kinds
of subtle relationships.
And so reducing that
to just some numbers,
it ends up wiping out--
>>REGINA: I see
what you're saying.
Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: And this
is part of our whole--
it's not just-- our
whole society is geared
toward thinking quantitatively.
It's related to the "find
the enemy" mentality.
It's find--
>>REGINA: I see
what you're saying.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
Find the quantity to increase
or reduce to make the world
a better place.
GDP is that.
If we only raise
GDP, it is thought,
everybody would be better off.
But what's happening
is that we are
converting a
multiplicity of values
into a single
thing called value.
And when we do that,
the unquantitative,
the qualitative is lost.
And we can see we
live in a society
right now that has more and more
and more of the quantitative,
of the things you can measure.
Twice as much floor
space per capita
as in the '60s, but less
and less of the qualitative,
the things that
we can't measure,
that don't show up
in the statistics.
So we have people like Steven
Pinker citing these statistics
that the world is getting
better and better.
Look at the numbers.
But meanwhile--
>>REGINA: It's more bereft
of meaning and connection.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
Like, what about suicide rates?
What about depression rates?
What about just like the
general level of joyfulness?
The freedom from anxiety?
Like, that kind of stuff,
it's a lot harder to measure
and it's a lot harder to
say that we're actually--
or the amount of
beauty in public space.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: You know, I drive
down the four-lane divided
highway, you know, and there's
the big box store and the strip
mall, and--
>>REGINA: Oh, my god,
just expansive gray
and asphalt and concrete.
So depressing.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah Yeah.
And I'm like, after 5,000
years of architecture--
>>REGINA: This is what we did?
>>EISENSTEIN: --is this
the best we can do?
>>REGINA: Is this
>>EISENSTEIN: We're supposed
to be advanced, you know?
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Well, OK, let's
move on past time banking.
Let's hear what you would look
at as maybe the second tenet
that you would really--
if you could create the world
and paint it the way you wish,
first is the debt forgiveness.
What might come in behind that?
>>EISENSTEIN: Well,
so there's-- yeah,
the debt forgiveness which--
>>REGINA: Free people.
Get the weight off our backs.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
And then to bring in--
I call it negative
interest economics.
I won't go into that
too much right now.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That's OK.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
Universal basic income.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: And then also--
>>REGINA: And there's some good
books out on that right now.
Debates--
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
>>REGINA: --about how this
can work, what the detriment
and what the benefit is.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
It's rising into conscious now.
>>REGINA: It is.
Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
And then the other thing is
to reunite ecology and economy
so that it's no longer
possible to profit
by exporting your
costs onto nature
and onto future generations.
So then if the best
business decision
is equal to the best
ecological decision,
then business and
environment no longer
have to be in competition
with each other.
>>REGINA: That just
makes perfect sense.
>>EISENSTEIN: So we
need to reward behavior
that heals the environment.
For example,
agricultural subsidies
need to turn toward regenerative
agriculture that builds soil.
Farmers need to be
paid to build soil.
So then any decision
that they make
that is to the
detriment of the soil,
even if it produces
cheaper commodities,
will no longer be economic.
So they'll have a
financial incentive
that helps them enact their
deep heart desire to be
in harmony with their land.
They actually, most of them
actually do love their land.
They don't want to be pouring
poisons onto the soil.
>>REGINA: They just
don't know how else
to keep the numbers up.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
They're in an
impossible situation.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: And the
impossible situation
is in part because of
the social agreements
that we call government policy.
And that can change.
>>REGINA: It can.
And, you know, a
couple of things.
What you're talking about just
requires such incredibly wise,
mature, clear thinking,
and not just local
levels but also at high
levels to make this work.
And years ago I interviewed
a man named Rob Williams who
talked about how corporations--
and he had provided this role,
even, I think at Enron--
need to have what you call
a chief shamanic officer.
A person that has
the wisdom to look
at how all things fit together
and what benefits the whole.
And this is the kind of
holistic thinker you are,
which is why I
admire you so much.
But we need to have the presence
of people like you at higher
levels and not just driven at
grassroots communities as well.
But a grassroot community, I
mean, that's a way to begin.
Grassroots is
always a place where
we can personally plug in.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
You know, I think if I were
the chief shamanic officer
at a corporation, I'm not sure
how much good I could actually
do.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: Because
understanding--
>>REGINA: The system is just
too wired toward the previous,
yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Previous model.
>>EISENSTEIN: The
pressure on them to--
>>REGINA: So we just have to
build it from the ground up.
We just have to start making
new agreements on a very
personal level, it sounds like.
>>EISENSTEIN: I would say
that we don't know what to do.
And that's good.
It's good to admit that we
don't know what to do right now.
Because so many of
our solutions are
coming from the same
mindset as the problems--
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: --that they
end up worsening the problem.
I wrote a book on
climate change, too,
and I give some
examples of this.
That biofuels
plantations, for example,
that are meant to address
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
but end up doing so much
damage to land and to cultures
that they end up making
the problem worse.
>>REGINA: Right.
That's where this really
high holistic thinking,
the proper use of intellect
needs to be employed.
And our own intuition.
We know some of these things.
We know.
We know it doesn't work.
>>EISENSTEIN: I did
this thought experiment.
You know, back in
the '60s they said,
if only we could put LSD in
the drinking water supply
and everybody would have
a spiritual awakening,
then everything would change.
And I kind of did a
thought experiment.
I'm like, OK, what
if that happened?
Everybody has this
mind-blowing psychedelic trip,
and then, now it's
Monday morning.
What do you do?
You go back to work.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That's kind of what
did happen, actually.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
That's what happens.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS] There's
a new book out on it.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>EISENSTEIN: So something
else has to happen.
And I think that there's
two things that are
needed for us to really go--
to really pass through
this metamorphosis.
One is the push,
and one is the pull.
The push is the breakdown of
the world that we're used to.
The failure of our systems,
which isn't necessarily
a total failure.
It's just that they get
less and less attractive.
And then there's the pull,
which is these experiences
that we have that show us
that a more beautiful world is
possible.
That show us what human life
could be in cooperation.
That show us what medicine
could be when it embraces
the wisdom of the body.
That show us what
agriculture can
be when we are in cooperation
with nature and not
in opposition to nature.
Like, we have these
experiences, they
could be spiritual experiences,
mystical experiences,
they could be
relational experiences.
And you've probably
had these, where
it doesn't feel like an
exception to reality,
but it feels like a
promise of what could be.
So we need the pull, which
takes the form of some
of these amazing
alternative projects
that are on the margins, as
we were talking about before.
And then we also need to push.
Without the pull, we
just feel despair.
Without the push, there's--
>>REGINA: Little
impetus to change.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>EISENSTEIN: The old
systems just keep us there,
even if we don't
agree with them.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>EISENSTEIN: Right.
>>REGINA: I couldn't
agree more with you.
And we also have to just--
we're afraid to tell
ourselves the truth.
Like, I'm exhausted.
I can't stand the
way I'm feeling
and the way I'm living life.
I don't even have
time to do anything
that makes me feel
connected, juicy, joyful.
And that's a matter of
getting honest with ourselves
without any agenda.
So it does start on a
deeply personal level.
>>EISENSTEIN: And
it's scary to do that,
because then you
don't know what to do.
>>REGINA: That's right.
>>EISENSTEIN: It's not
like you admit that,
and all of a sudden
you know what to do.
>>REGINA: No.
>>EISENSTEIN: You have
to go through the--
I call it the space
between stories.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
And that's where
stories come back in.
Listening to each other's
stories, how one person
found their way forward.
You know, and this is a
lending hand to someone
else who's come
to this discovery
and doesn't know what to do.
And it's beautiful.
That's where we all come
in, because we actually need
each other now more than ever.
Always did, just forgot.
>>EISENSTEIN: Yes.
Yeah.
We need each other.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
On that note, Charles,
we're out of time.
And I to thank you so much.
And I will continue following
your work because I just love
the clarity of your thinking.
And you have these
beautiful shiny eyes.
It's showing me
that you actually--
OK, I know you wanted to do the
rich and famous thing at one
point, but you're
really showing up.
I just want to say
thank you for that.
>>EISENSTEIN: Thanks, Regina.
Yeah, it's a real pleasure.
>>REGINA: I love Charles'
view of life and purpose
and economy, and
you can go deeper
into his work and his
books and articles
and such by going to
CharlesEisenstein.org.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]